The metabolic and anatomical complexity of root microhabitats modulate their interaction with the microbiota

Juan P. Frene, Valéria Custódio, Helena Rouco, Sandra Martinez-Jarquin, Yi-Qun Gao, Vincenzo di Bari, Niokhor Bakhoum, Katerina Velchova, Alexander Ware, Kim Dong-Hyun, Alvaro Mata, and Gabriel Castrillo

Abstract
As part of a continuous communication process with the microbiota, plant roots can adapt their morphology to facilitate microbial colonization in response to abiotic stresses. Conversely, root anatomy can be modified as a consequence of microbial establishment. However, the factors controlling this synchronization between root anatomy and microbiota recruitment remain largely unknown. Here, we reveal that root anatomical complexity determines root anatomical plasticity in response to microbial colonisation. Furthermore, we demonstrate that root anatomical plasticity driven by the microbiota represents an advantage for plant survival in nutrient-competitive environments. Using synthetic root models and actual roots, we demonstrate that root anatomical plasticity is associated with metabolic adjustments upon microbial establishment. We identify a specific metabolite, N6,N6,N6-Trimethyl-L-lysine, controlling root anatomical plasticity in response to microbial colonization. Our work generalizes the importance of the microhabitat complexity for microbiome recruitment under challenging environmental conditions. These findings could be applied for optimization of root-microbiota interactions in agricultural settings

